# README for greylag


XXX add some desc here



##############################################################################

Features:

- Can simultaneously search multiple potential modifications on the same
residue (e.g., K+14, K+16, K+28).  [Both X!Tandem and SEQUEST silently fail to
do this.  Myrimatch does it?  OMSSA?]

- No limit on the number of simultaneous modifications searched (aside from
user patience).  [SEQUEST limited to three deltas.  OMSSA limited to 32 sites
per peptide.  Myrimatch limited to sizeof(int)-1 sites/kinds per peptide (and
fails silently for more).]

- Can simultaneously search multiple mass regimes in a single search.  (A
"mass regime" is an assignment of residue masses.  Two common regimes would be
"monoisotopic" and "monoisotopic with N15".)  [Currently X!Tandem supports
isotopes searches in a manner similar to SEQUEST (requiring a follow-on
merge), or by searching for isotopes as potential modifications.]  XXX

- Can simultaneously search alternate potential modification sets.  So, for
example, one can search for methylation of {K,S}, or acetylation of {K,S,T},
without searching peptides that may have combinations of both.

- Simultaneous search should improve statistical accuracy, as compared to
separate search with a subsequent merge.  It also should be at least a little
faster.

- Modification limit can be specified as a limit on modifications per peptide
(similar to SEQUEST) (and Myrimatch?) and/or as a limit on the combinations
searched per peptide (similar to X!Tandem and OMSSA).  (The first limit
differs from SEQUEST in that a SEQUEST limit of N would allow N modifications
for each delta in a peptide, whereas greylag allows N modifications total per
peptide.)

- Modifications can be specified by formula (e.g., +CH2 instead of +14 for
methylation).  This allows the mass delta to be calculated more accurately,
and correctly handles cases for which the delta depends on the mass regime
(e.g., because the modification involves an isotope).  XXX

- Modifications may be named ("14@K(methylation),14@S(methylation)"), which
simplifies modification tracking in downstream software.  XXX

- Supports different mass regimes for parent and fragment mass calculations
(e.g., average for parent and monoisotopic for fragment).  [X!Tandem currently
only supports monoisotopic parent masses.]  XXX

- Automatic search for PCA (pyrrolidone carboxyl acid) potential
modifications, as X!Tandem does.  (SEQUEST apparently doesn't do this.)

- Refinement steps, similar to X!Tandem.  XXX

- X!Tandem-compatible input and output file formats.  Can be used as a drop-in
replacement for X!Tandem, with some limitations.

- Has a "quirks-mode" feature that attempts to replicate X!Tandem's behavior
as closely as possible (warts and all).

- Supports ms2 spectrum files.  [X!Tandem, OMSSA, Myrimatch require
conversion.]

- Supports multiple spectrum files.  [X!Tandem handles only one at a time.]

- Integrated cluster implementation.  [X!Tandem has a multithreading feature
that works on single machines, and an add-on cluster implementation.
Myrimatch uses multithreading and MPI.]

- Source code is relatively small and simple (currently about 15% of
X!Tandem's size).  Most functionality is implemented in a high-level
interpreted language (Python), with low-level code (C++) used only for
performance-critical sections.  This makes it much easier to understand, learn
from, fix, and extend.

- Carefully checks its input for correctness.  [X!Tandem ignores errors in
many cases, leading to incorrect output.]

- Implemented with numerical stability in mind, and all calculations performed
in double-precision.  [X!Tandem has some issues with quantization and
floating-point comparison, and uses single-precision in most places.]

- Source code carefully examined for correctness.  [X!Tandem has mismatched
new/delete, potential buffer overflows, etc.]

- Relative speed.  XXX seems okay, but not yet tested or optimized...

- Platform independent.  XXX (only Linux tried so far)

- Better progress logging.

- Built-in profiling feature.


XXX = feature not yet completed


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Author:	Mike Coleman  (mkc ...at... stowers-institute ...dot... org)
	Stowers Institute for Medical Research
	1000 East 50th Street
	Kansas City, MO 64110  USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
